[SOUND]
So what is HTML?
What is the term HTML even mean and
how does ti relate to the web?
In a minute we'll talk about the big
picture of three technologies
that drive the web.
HTML, CSS and JavaScript but
where does HTML fit?
In other words, precisely what role
does HTML play in web development?
As we go along,
you will see that understanding the
answers to these pretty simple questions
will actually help you to make correct
coding decisions down the line.
Well first of all, so
what does HTML stand for?
Well it stands for,
Hyper Text Markup Language.
So let's go over each one of these words
and find out what exactly they mean.
So first of all, hypertext.
Well hypertext is text which
contains links to other texts and
that's basically the entire web, right?
One document points to another document
which points to a bunch of other documents
and it grows on and on and on.
Sometimes they link back to
the original document and
it becomes one gigantic web and obviously
it's not just about text nowadays,
hypermedia is plays a huge
role in the web today.
You can watch videos, listen to music and
really hypermedia is just
an extension of hypertext.
The next term is Markup.
So markup means to mark something up,
to annotate.
So for example,
it's really all about content.
On the Web it's all about content.
So if you have some content for example if
you have a document you're writing called,
Why I Love This Course,
which is I'm sure is going to be
the title of your next blog post.
That's the content and you want to
annotate the content to tell the browser,
or to tell some other machine out there,
some other program out there, what this
content is and that's what HTML does.
So HTML goes and
surround that, surrounds and
wraps that content in some
markup language like tags.
So you can see here
Why I Love This Course is wrapped around
with a title tag which
kind of tells us and
some other software out there that
this is the title of this document.
Which brings me to the first big point,
HTML is human readable.
So these tags look like instructions for
a document structure.
Structure, you don't need to run it
through some interpreter in order to
understand the output
structure of this document.
It's very clear what it is.
The last word in hypertext markup language
is language and language basically implies
that it has its own syntax meaning there's
a right and a wrong way to code it.
So for instance in the example on
the left the closing div tag appears
after the closing h1 tag.
So it's closing order is
switched which causes parsing and
potentially rendering errors.
So the html is language.
You could actually code it up in a way
such that something is wrong and
something will break.
Html also has it's own
semantics which means tag
names can mean something either
to machines or to humans.
Okay.
So let's talk about the three technologies
that drive the web.
Each one has its own
distinctive purpose and
all three of them fit
very nicely together.
Let's start with HTML.
HTML provides the structure
which means what components
does the HTML document have?
For example, it can have one heading,
two paragraphs, and a footer.
Note that that does not tell you anything
about how these components are visually
laid out, what they look like, what
color they are, what font size they are.
It only tells you what are the components.
Like in a house if you have three rooms
and a kitchen you don't really know what
color the kitchen is,
what color the walls of the kitchen.
The only thing you know is what
components make up the house.
The color and style is the role of CSS.
So colors, layouts, font style,
font sizes, in other words any
stylistic types of things.
So for example if we have a heading in our
HTML document, it will tell us what color,
what font size it is.
So that's the job of CSS and the third,
JavaScript, it's job is to provide
behavior, provide functionality.
It adds functionality to the page, so for
example what happens when HTML document
finishes loading into the browser?
Or what happens if I click
on one of the headings?
That's the job of JavaScript
to provide that behavior.
Let's take a look at a quick example
of these concepts in action.
Okay, so the example that we're going to
take a look at is located in the examples
lecture zero one folder, and the file
we're going to look at is called structure
dash only dash before dot HTML and
it's a simple HTML file.
There's nothing but some HTML and
the dummy text data here,
dummy text, and it's got a title,
it's got a heading here.
Couple of paragraphs and
this has a footer,
where in the footer we have
the tech support email address.
For the poor soul whose going to try
to contact this technical support.
Joking obviously.
Okay, so, basically, nothing more than
there's just a HTML and some dummy text
and we're also going to take a look at
structure-only-after.html where it's
the exact same HTML document but
we inserted some styles into it and
some behavior as well.
So for example, the heading,
we made it green and we center aligned it.
The second paragraph has
some margin applied to it.
The footer here has a paragraph
with our text support email, and
if we click in the text support email
is going to pop up and alert for us.
Okay, so let's take a look at both
of these documents in the browser.
Okay so here's the first document.
There is nothing special about it.
It's got that title we talked about,
a couple of paragraphs and
the tech support email at
the bottom in the footer and
if I click on it nothing actually happens
but if we look at document number two we
see that HTML is Structure Only
heading is now green and
a much bigger title and we see that the
position of it has moved to the center.
And we also see that the second paragraph
is in the center and it's much bigger font
compared to before and if we click on
the email address that we talked about,
we see an alert gets popped up with
the message emailing us is useless,
which sounds just about right for most
people's experiences with tech support.
So the thing to notice here is that the
difference between the two HTML document
are the up styles and
the behavior applied but
the structure of both HTML
documents is exactly the same.
So in summary, we spoke about HTML and the
fact that its job is to annotate content
and define document structure and
obviously, as any language,
it has a right and wrong syntax, which
you'll have to learn in order to code it.
And the three Core Web Technologies,
HTML, CSS, and
Javascript work very well together because
each one of them has its own distinct and
precise role and they kind of
don't really step on each other.
The work very nicely together.
Next we'll talk about a bit of
a relevant history of the HTML standard,
and I do mean relevant.